# Stellar Stream catalogs

Welcome! This is a guide for the stellar stream catalogs from Holm-Hansen, Chen, & Gnedin (2025). Specifically, this repository contains information on the contents of the catalogs, and how to download them. A jupter notebook `example.ipynb` is provided which shows how to load in one of the catalogs and perform some simple calculations with them. 

## Contents

1) Background Information
2) Download Instructions
3) Catalog Description



## Background Information

In total, we provide catalogs of globular cluster stellar streams from four different cosmological halos. Two are from TNG50, and the other two are from the FIRE-2 cosmologial simulation suite. The TNG50 halo Subfind IDs are 523889 and 519311, and the FIRE-2 halos are m12i and m12f. 

The catalogs are generated by evolving a globular cluster population in a basis function expansion potential fit to each halo. The streams themselves are generated starting from a lookback time of ~3.5 Gyr using the particle spray algorithm from Chen et. al (2025). The globular cluster modeling makes use of the Chen et. al (2024) globular cluster evolution code. The full details of the calculation are provided in Holm-Hansen, Chen, & Gnedin (2025).


If you make use of the catalogs as part of a publication, we ask that you please cite the release paper:

- C. Holm-Hansen, Y. Chen, & O.Y. Gnedin (2025). *Catalog of Mock Stellar Streams in Milky Way-like Galaxies* OJAp, [xxxxxxxxxxxx]

To access the catalogs, you will need `numpy` and `h5py`, which can both be installed with `pip`:

```bash
pip install numpy h5py
```

while not needed to use the catalogs, the analysis notebook also uses `matplotlib` and `astropy`.


## Download Instructions

The catalogs will be made publicly available on Zenodo once the paper has been accepted to OJAp. Once accepted the link will be added here. Please contact the authors if you wish to access the catalogs before then.

Please note that the files for each halo are ~2-3 GBs, and downloading all 4 halos will take up about 10 GB of storage space. Users should ensure they have enough storage available before downloading all 4 halos.


## Catalog Description

Each halo consists of two `.hdf5` files: a smaller file, titled `halo_id_clusters.hdf5`, and a larger file, `halo_id_catalog.hdf5`, where `halo_id` is replaced by the respective id of the cosmological halo used (e.g., m12i, 523889, etc.)

`halo_id_clusters.hdf5` contains information about the progenitor globular clusters and their orbits. `halo_id_streams.hdf5` contains the individual stars in each stream, as well as their properties.

Each file can be loaded in using `h5py`:

``` python
f = h5py.File(root + "523889_streams.hdf5", "r")
```

`f` will now contain keys starting from 0 and going up to the number of streams in the current chosen halo. Each key represents an individual stream. For more details see the `example.ipynb` notebook.

The available data for each stream and their units are described below.

`halo_id_clusters.hdf5` contains the following:

| Name | Units | Description |
|:----------|----------|----------|
| x  | kpc  | Galactocentric x coordinate  |
| y  | kpc  | Galactocentric y coordinate  |
| z  | kpc  | Galactocentric z coordinate  |
| vx  | km/s  | Galactocentric vx coordinate  |
| vy  | km/s  | Galactocentric vy coordinate |
| vz  | km/s  | Galactocentric vz coordinate  |
| mass | $M_{\odot}$ | Cluster mass over time |
| Txx | Gyr $^{-2}$ | Tidal tensor xx component |
| Tyy | Gyr $^{-2}$ | Tidal tensor yy component |
| Tzz | Gyr $^{-2}$ | Tidal tensor zz component |
| Txy | Gyr $^{-2}$ | Tidal tensor xy component |
| Txz | Gyr $^{-2}$ | Tidal tensor xz component |
| Tyz | Gyr $^{-2}$ | Tidal tensor yz component |
| age | Gyr | Age of the cluster in Gyr |
| feh | dex | $\rm [Fe/H]$ of the cluster |


All quantities except age and feh are numpy arrays which give the values over the 3.5 Gyr orbit in the time-evolving BFE potential. Age and feh are scalar values.

`halo_id_streams.hdf5` contains information about individual stream stars and is organized in the same manner. The available properties for each stream, as well as their units, are as follows:


| Name | Units | Description |
|:----------|----------|----------|
| x  | kpc  | Galactocentric x coordinate  |
| y  | kpc  | Galactocentric y coordinate  |
| z  | kpc  | Galactocentric z coordinate  |
| vx  | km/s  | Galactocentric vx coordinate  |
| vy  | km/s  | Galactocentric vy coordinate |
| vz  | km/s  | Galactocentric vz coordinate  |
| mass | $M_{\odot}$ | stellar mass |
| ejection_time | Gyr | How long ago a given star left the cluster |
| energy | kpc $^{2}$ / Myr $^{2}$ | Energy of the star's orbit at the present time |



